[The singer makes his kids listen to hard rock and can’t stand Angels because Robbie Williams stole his drummer, but which song is the best to have sex to? Hint: he wrote it, The first single I bought 
 The first single that I’m prepared to admit to buying was Gangsta’s Paradise by Coolio. My parents had the obvious Beatles, Beach Boys and Pink Floyd albums, but I can’t remember going out and buying stuff before then. I bought it from a record shop in Bristol next to a Spudulike, the kind of real shop the world’s missing., The song I inexplicably know every lyric to
 Coz I Luv You by Slade, because I cover it on tour. If you’re doing an evening of James Blunt songs, you’re going to need to throw in a cover of someone else to give the night a bit of rock, aren’t you? Otherwise, it’s going to be a pretty downtempo affair. So we chuck in a bit of Slade, because it allows me to crowdsurf., The song I can no longer listen to 
 Angels by Robbie Williams, because he stole my drummer. And my lighting designer. Well, he just paid them more. Now we share drummers, so we’re in a throuple – Robbie Williams, our drummer and me. The worst bit is when it’s their turn and I’m forced to just watch., The best song to have sex to
 You’re Beautiful by James Blunt. It’s fantastic. I’ve tried it myself. And it’s three minutes and 30 seconds to the second, which is all the time you’re going to need., The song that gets me up in the morning
 Back in Black by AC/DC, because I am only playing my children 80s guitar bands. They have a choice of Europe, AC/DC, Survivor and Alice Cooper. They don’t know there’s anything else out there. I just find it amusing on the school run. I’ve always wanted to be a rock star. I wanted to have long hair and play the electric guitar and be in a band. But to be in a band, you need friends. So I’ve ended up with an acoustic guitar and a tear., The song I’d like played in my funeral
 Well, funeral songs are my forte. Goodbye My Lover was the most played song at funerals in the 00s, the 00s being the greatest musical decade known to humanity. I’ve written Monsters, a song for my father for when he might not be with us any more. If I get the choice then maybe I might chuck in one of my own called One of the Brightest Stars. Although knowing my luck, Robbie Williams will turn up and sing Angels with the drummer he stole from me., The remastered 20th anniversary release of Back to Bedlam is out on 11 October. James Blunt tours in February 2025. , Sign up to Inside Saturday, The only way to get a look behind the scenes of the Saturday magazine. Sign up to get the inside story from our top writers as well as all the must-read articles and columns, delivered to your inbox every weekend., after newsletter promotion]
