[The documentary photographer Owen Harvey visited Jurupa Valley, California, to speak to young Americans training for the highly skilled and intricate all-female sport inspired by the Mexican revolution. There he discovered escaramuza’s importance in instilling discipline and pride in Mexico’s heritage and family traditions., It is National Hispanic Heritage Month, which recognises the contributions and influence of Hispanic Americans to the achievements, culture, and history of the US, Escaramuza in English means “skirmish” and is an all-female sport within charrería – the Mexican equivalent of rodeo., It consists of highly choreographed equestrian dances and is inspired by las adelitas of the Mexican revolution, female soldiers who would ride with the men acting as decoys on the battlefield, performing intricate skills on horseback., Before rehearsals young escaramuzas have fun, performing choreographed hand-clapping. Jurupa Valley, California, 2024., Three of the escaramuzas ride at speed during a rehearsal at Jurupa Valley for a competition in Mexico., Their involvement continued throughout 1910-1920 armed revolt that not only resulted in the end a 30-year dictatorship in Mexico and the establishment of a constitutional republic but the transformation of Mexican culture., Years later, in 1953, women were officially allowed to compete in charrería for the first time, a previously male-dominated tradition that was often passed down from father to son. It was also the year that women gained the right to vote in Mexico., The escaramuza competitions now run yearly from February to November. The participants ride side saddle and perform tricks with their horses at great speed, while wearing traditional adelita-styled outfits in homage to the women who took up arms against oppression more than a century ago., Escaramuzas take a break during a rehearsal session for a competition in Mexico., Although charrería is Mexico’s national sport, there are escaramuza teams in both the US and Canada and the sport often acts as a way for the Mexican diaspora to connect to their family traditions., During the summer of 2024 I documented the next generation of escaramuzas, based in Jurupa Valley, California. I met parents who wanted their daughters to take up the sport to instil strength, discipline, pride and understanding of their history., Amelie sits in the stands of the practice school., Mireya Campos-Yzaguirre (parent of Amelie Yzaguirre), coach and coordinator of Las Azaleas Dientes de Leche, “I have been riding horses since the age of five. Ever since then I aspired to join a escaramuza team. When I was 13 years old my parents supported me and allowed me join. Since then I never turned back and have been extremely passionate for charrería, which is Mexico’s national sport. At the age 18 I joined Las Azaleas. When my daughter Amelie was growing up and I would see the love she had for horses and riding, I knew it was time to make and coordinate a team that she could be part of, along with other girls her age in our community. I’m proud of their accomplishments in there short time as a team and I look forward to the future., “It’s very important to me that my children stay connect with their Mexican traditions, because living in the US it easy to lose connection with your family’s traditions. I want them to always know what their grandparents had to do in order for us to have the privilege to be Mexican American.”, Sofia and Amelie prepare the horses for rehearsals with the team, the Azaleas., “Escaramuza teaches discipline, to never give up, always give it your all, things are not given to you, your have to work hard and put in a lot of work. You build a sisterhood with your teammates.”, Sofia stands at the entrance of the riding school., Adriana Olguin (parent of Sofia), “My husband and his family grew up in charrería. It’s something so beautiful to see the girls ride and enjoy it as much as we do. Learning and holding on to Mexican traditions is important as it reinforces values and personal responsibilities., “I feel escaramuza teaches the girls responsibility, to never give up, always give it your best, dedication.”, Aliandra sits on her horse during rehearsals. i, Julio Chavez (parent of Aliandra Chavez-Suazo), “I chose to enrol my daughter in escaramuza as a way of connecting her to our cultural heritage. It is important to me that she takes pride in her roots and actively participates in preserving our traditional sport and way of life. My hope is that she will one day be able to pass down this rich tradition to her own children., “It is crucial for me to pass this tradition down to her as it is not a widely popular sport like football, basketball, or baseball. I am concerned that if I do not take action, this tradition may fade away., “I believe that escaramuza demonstrates valuable qualities such as accountability and independence. Life memories and collaborating with a horse is truly empowering., “We celebrate our heritage by acknowledging those who came before us, remembering them and stories, pictures and music, sometimes maybe with a special dish and other times it’s just gatherings.”, Julissa stands proudly in her traditional escaramuza dress, which is worn when competing in the sport., Monica Arteaga (parent of Julissa Amalia Jimenez), “Julissa’s grandfather and father are charros so she always was around escaramuza. We decided to put her in when we saw that she loved the sport and understood the concept of riding on a team., “We as parents are already a little lost with so many responsibilities and modification life has given us as the years progress. We want our children to understand where and why the charreada tradition came from., “Julissa has learned since riding on a team to be respectful, dedicated, organised and on time. Her coaches and instructors have showed her discipline and responsibility. Being an escaramuza is preparing her for her career and just life in general.”, A shadow of one of the escaramuzas travels across the boundary of the riding school during the evening sun., Owen Harvey is a documentary photographer based in London. His work has focused on diverse subcultures and communities, examining themes such as identity, belonging and heritage and has spanned topics including low-riding, skinheads, mods, young novilleros and, most recently, escaramuzas.]
